## Quiz 2: Counting and Probability

Name: ________    Score: ________

### Please show your work to get the full credit

1. Find the value of following expressions.


    a. $\binom{7}{4}=$
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

    b. $P(8,3)=$
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
    c. $\binom{35}{34}=$
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

2. How many two digits odd numbers are there? 
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

3. Anyone in a class of $50$ students either owns a fish, a dog, a cat, or does not own a pet. $25$ own a dog, $16$ own a cat and $12$ owns a fish. $5$ own a dog and a fish, $8$ own a dog and a cat and $6$ own a cat and a fish. Only $2$ own a dog, a cat and a fish. How many student does not own a pet at all?  
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

4. How many triangles can one make out of vertices of a octogon? 
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

5. How many different permutations of the word "element" are there?
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

6. How many paths from a lower left corner to upper right corner for a grid in the picture? Each path can only go upper or go right. 
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

7. How many different ways to express the sum $a+b+c=10$ by allowing $a,b,c$ nonnegative integers? 
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

8. What is the probability of a positive integer less than $100$ being nonsquare and odd?
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

9. What is the probability when flipping $5$ coins with at least $2$ heads? 
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

10. A drawer contains $7$ blue socks and $5$ red socks. If randomly draw $4$ socks, what is the probability of getting a pair of blue socks and a pair of red socks? 
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

11. what is the probability of a triangle made by $3$ vertices of a cube being isoscele? 
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



