## Lecture 10: Probability
### Probability basic
The probability $P(A)$ of an event is the ratio of possible outcomes of $A$ and total outcomes. It is a number between $0$ and $1$.

**Example**:

* $P$("head" when flipping a coin)$=1/2$ because head is one of the outcome of head and tail. 
* $P$("HHH" when flipping 3 coins)$=1/8$
* $P$(two heads when flipping 3 coins)$=3/8$ because $HHT,HTH,THH$
* $k$-heads when flipping $n$ coins $$P(A)=\frac{\binom{n}{k}}{2^n}$$
* $P$("6" when rolling a dice)$=1/6$.
* $P$(sum up to $12$ when rolling $2$ dices)$=1/36$.
* $P$(sum up to $9$ when rolling $2$ dices)$=4/36$ because $9=3+6=4+5=5+4=6+3$.
* $P$(sum up to $7$ when rolling $2$ dices)$=6/36$.
* Permutations of "ALGEBRA" with "AA"
    * all permutations $7!/2$ because of the symmetry AA.
    * with $AA$ together: $6!$
    * $P=\frac{6!}{7!/2}=2/7$

**More fun example**:
* $P$(being an even number)$=1/2$
* $P$(being a prime number)$=0$
* $P$(raining chance)$=40$%
* Three boxes with one with one million dollars and two empty. You choose one, the winning chance is $1/3$. Someone knows the answer removing one empty box. Are you gonna switch? 
    * what is the winning chance if you do not switch?
    * what is the winning chance if you switch?

### Picking with(without) replacement
* $3$ green marbles and $4$ red marbles in a bag.
* if picking with replacement, the probability of getting two green is $(3/7)^2=9/49$.
* if picking without replacement, the probability of getting two green is $3/7*2/6=6/42$.
* if picking without replacement, the probability of getting two red is $4/7*3/6=2/7$.

**More difficult examples**:
* Rolling $3$ dice exactly two $6$s.
    * total outcome $6^3$
    * possibility: $6a6$, $66a$, $a66$. So $3*5$.
    * $P=15/216=5/72$.
* Selecting a committee of $5$ out of $6$ boys and $6$ girls. What is chance there are exactly $3$ girls in the committee?
    * total outcome? $\binom{12}{5}$.
    * the choice is $\binom{6}{3}*\binom{6}{2}$
* Rolling $2$ dice with the second dice number larger than the first dice number.
    * total outcome $36$
    * either $a>b$, $a=b$ or $a<b$, with the count $15$, $6$ and $15$.
* Rolling $3$ dice with the last dice number larger than the sum of first two numbers.
    * total outcome $216$
    * Numerate all the cases.
* If raining chance is always $1/3$, what is the chance raining one day in next $4$ days?
    * no rain chance: $2/3$
    * no rain at all $16/81$
    * complement: $65/81$