## Lecture 16: Factorization and quadratic equation formula

### Polynomials
A polynomial of degree $d$ is an expression of an unknown $x$ as below
$$p(x)=a_dx^d+a_{n-1}x^{n-1}+...+a_1x+a_0$$
Here we assume that 
* the leading coefficient $a_d\neq 0$, otherwise it is a lower degree polynomial.
* $a_d, ...,a_0$ are called coefficients of the polynomial and they are fixed numbers.
* $x$ is unknown so you can plug in any number into it. For example, $p(0)=a_0$ and 
$$p(1)=a_d+a_{d-1}+...+a_0$$

#### Examples
* Degree zero polynomials are just constant $p(x)=a_0$.
* Degree one polynomials are called **linear** $p(x)=ax+b$
* Degree two polynomisla are called **quadratics** $p(x)=ax^2+bx+c$
* Degree three polynomisla are called **cubics** $p(x)=ax^3+bx^2+cx+d$
* So can define **quartics**, **qunitcs** and **sextics**.

#### Roots of a polynomial
A **root** or a solution of a polynomial $p(x)$ is a number $x_0$ such that $p(x_0)=0$.

#### Examples
* for degree one, finding roots means $ax+b=0$. So there is only one solution $x_0=-\frac{b}{a}$.
* for degree two, $p(x)=ax^2+bx+c=0$ is not trivial.
* for degree three and four, they are solved until 1700.
* for degree five and above, Galois and Abel proved in 1800 that there are not general formula.  

#### Factization
What can help solve the roots for quadratic equation? **Factorization**!!
$$p(x)=x^2-4=(x-2)(x+2)=0$$
so $x_0=\pm 2$.
$$p(x)=x^2-7x+10=(x-2)(x-5)=0$$
so $x_0=2$ or $x_0=5$. 

A **factorization** of a polynomial $p(x)$ of degree $d$ is a product of linear ones:
$$p(x)=a_dx^d+a_{n-1}x^{n-1}+...+a_1x+a_0=a_d(x-x_1)(x-x_2)...(x-x_d)=0$$

A degree $d$ polynomial can have up to at most $d$ roots! For degree one, we can always find a solution but for degree two, **FALSE**!!

$$x^2+1=0$$

#### Vieta's formula for degree two
$$p(x)=ax^2+bx+c=a(x^2+\frac{b}{a}x+\frac{c}{a})=a(x-x_1)(x-x_2)=a(x^2-(x_1+x_2)x+x_1x_2)$$
So we get 
$$x_1+x_2=-\frac{b}{a}$$

$$x_1x_2=-\frac{c}{a}$$

When $a=1$, this is very useful to guess the factorization. 

#### Examples
* For $p(x)=x^2-7x+10$, the sum is $7$ and the product is $10$. So we have $(x-2)(x-5)$.
* For $p(x)=x^2+14x+49$, the sum is $-14$ and the product is $49$. So we have $(x+7)^2$.
* For $p(x)=x^2-2x-3$, the sum is $2$ and the product is $-3$. So we have $(x-3)(x+1)$.
* For $p(x)=9x^2-12x+4=9(x^2-\frac{4}{3}x+\frac{4}{9})$, the sum is $\frac{4}{3}$ and the product is $\frac{4}{9}$. So we have $4(x-\frac{2}{3})^2$.

#### General formula for quadratics
The root formula for $p(x)=ax^2+bx+c$ is 
$$x_0=\frac{-b\pm\sqrt{b^2-4ac}}{2a}.$$

So the factorization formula is 
$$p(x)=a(x-\frac{-b-\sqrt{b^2-4ac}}{2a})(x-\frac{-b+\sqrt{b^2-4ac}}{2a})$$

**Example**
* $x^2-7x+10$
    * $x_0=\frac{7\pm\sqrt{49-40}}{2}=\frac{7\pm 3}{2}=5,2$
* two numbers sum to $a$ and product to $b$.
    * this is the same as $x^2-ax+b$ by Vieta's formula.
    * so the solution is  $x_0=\frac{-a\pm\sqrt{a^2-4b}}{2}.$
* $x^4-7x^2+10=0$
    * let $y=x^2$. So we have $y^2-7y+10=0$. So $y^2=2,5$. Thus $y=\pm\sqrt{5},\pm\sqrt{2}.$
* $\sqrt{1+\sqrt{1+\sqrt{1+\sqrt{1+...}}}}$
    * let the result be $x$.
    * $x^2=1+x$ or $x^2-x-1=0$.
    * $x_0=\frac{1\pm\sqrt{5}}{2}$. For the plus number, we get $\frac{1+\sqrt{5}}{2}=1.618...$ the golden ratio.
* $\frac{1}{1+\frac{1}{1+\frac{1}{1+...}}}$
    * let the result be $x$.
    * $\frac{1}{x}=1+x$ or $x^2+x-1=0$.
    * $x_0=\frac{-1\pm\sqrt{5}}{2}$. For the plus number, we get $\frac{-1+\sqrt{5}}{2}=0.618...$ the golden ratio.

#### Why the formula?
Complement square trick
$$\begin{align}
x^2+bx+c&=0\\
(x^2+\frac{b}{2})^2-\frac{b^2}{4}+c&=0\\
(x+\frac{b}{2})^2&=\frac{b^2}{4}-c\\
x+\frac{b}{2}&=\pm\sqrt{\frac{b^2}{4}-c}\\
x&=-\frac{b}{2}\pm\sqrt{\frac{b^2}{4}-c}=\frac{-b\pm\sqrt{b^2-4c}}{2}
\end{align}
$$