## Lecture 3: Greatest Common Divisors and Least Common Multiples 
#### Greatest Common Divisor
Given two positive integers $a$ and $b$, the **greatest common divisor (factor)** is the largest factor that divides both $a$ and $b$. We use $\gcd(a,b)$ to denote the greatest common divisor (GCD).

##### Example
* If $a$ divides $b$, then $\gcd(a,b)=a.$ 
    * $\gcd(3,6)=3$
    * $\gcd(12,2)=2$ 
* If $p$ is a prime, then $\gcd(p,a)=1 \text{ or }p$.
    * $\gcd(5,16)=1$
    * $\gcd(5,100)=5$

* $\gcd(a,b)$ is always less than $a$ and $b$. 
    * $\gcd(15,24)=3$
    * $\gcd(91, 52)=13$

##### GCD from the prime factorization
**Example**
* Since $91=7*13$ and $52=2^2*13$, then GCD can be read directly from the common prime factors, in this case, it is $13$.
* In general, once you know the prime factorization, just pick the common prime factors and the smaller exponent.
    * $$\gcd(2^2*3^3*5, 2^3*3^2*7)=2^2*3^2=36$$
    * $$\gcd(2^{100}*3^{40}*13^2, 3^7*5^5*13)=3^7*13$$
* If you already observe a common factor $c$, then $$\gcd(a,b)=c\cdot \gcd(\frac{a}{b}, \frac{b}{c})$$
    * $\gcd(112,80)=4*\gcd(28,20)=16$
    * $\gcd(126,162)=6*\gcd(21,27)=18$

**Warning:** This is a really inefficient algorithm. In general, prime factorization is costly even for computers when the number is very large. 

**Homework** Ask ChatGPT for a prime factorization algorithm and ask it to time the algorithm. Try a relatively large number about 10 digits for example. 

##### Euclidean algorithm (300 BC) 
The most efficient algorithm ([Wiki link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_algorithm)) to calculate $\gcd(a,b)$:
* Step 1: Assume $a$ is the smaller number. Calculate $b$ divided by $a$ with the remaider $r$:
$$b=k\cdot a+r$$
* Step 2: If $r=0$, then $\gcd(a,b)=a$. If $r\neq 0$, then $\gcd(a,b)=\gcd(a,r)$. Now repeat Step 1 on $\gcd(a,r)$.

**Example**
* $\gcd(80,112)=\gcd(80,32)=\gcd(16,32)=16$
* $\gcd(105,252)=\gcd(105,42)=\gcd(21,42)=21$
* $\gcd(162,126)=\gcd(36,126)=\gcd(36,18)=18$
* $\gcd(80,112+80*123456789)=\gcd(80, 112)=16$
* $\gcd(1800000001,30)=1$
* $\gcd(a,a+1)=1$

We can define $\gcd(a,b,c)$. 
**Example** Find $a,b,c$ such that $\gcd(a,b,c)=1$ but GCD of any two are not $1$. 
**Solution**: $\gcd(2*3,3*5,5*2)=1$

##### Least common multiple
Given two positive integers $a$ and $b$, the **least common multiple** is the smallest number that both $a$ and $b$ divides. We use $\text{lcm}(a,b)$ to denote LCM. We always have $$\text{lcm}(a,b)\le ab$$  

**Example**
* $\text{lcm}(4,6)=12$
* $\text{lcm}(12,16)=48$
* If $\gcd(a,b)=1$, in other words, no common factors, then $\text{lcm}(a,b)=ab$.
    * $\text{lcm}(4,13)=52$
    * $\text{lcm}(a,a+1)=a(a+1)$
* If $c$ divides both $a$ and $b$, then 
$$\text{lcm}(a,b)=c\cdot \text{lcm}(a/c,b/c)$$ 

##### LCM formula
LCM via prime factorization is quite easy.Take all prime factors and the higher exponents.

**Example**
* $\text{lcm}(2^2,2*3)=2^2*3=12$
* $\text{lcm}(2^2*3^3*5,2*3*7)=2^2*3^3*5*7$

 We can use the following formula to calculate LCM in general.
$$\gcd(a,b)\text{lcm}(a,b)=a\cdot b$$

**Number Proof** 
If $a=2^3\cdot 3^5\cdot 7\cdot 17$ and $b=2^2\cdot 3^7\cdot 7^2\cdot 19$, then 
$$\gcd(a,b)=2^2\cdot 3^5\cdot 7$$

$$\text{lcm}(a,b)=2^3\cdot 3^7 \cdot 7^2\cdot 17\cdot 19$$

You can verify this directly.

**Proof** We can pull out GCD as below.
$$\text{lcm}(a,b)=\gcd(a,b)\text{lcm}(\frac{a}{\gcd(a,b)},\frac{b}{\gcd(a,b)})$$
Note that $\frac{a}{\gcd(a,b)},\frac{b}{\gcd(a,b)}$ have no common GCD. Thus 
$$\text{lcm}(\frac{a}{\gcd(a,b)},\frac{b}{\gcd(a,b)})=\frac{a}{\gcd(a,b)}\cdot\frac{b}{\gcd(a,b)}$$ 
Plug this into the first equation. We are done. 