## Lecture 7: Basic Counting
### Counting patterns
* how many numbers in the series $1,7,13,19,...,109$?
    * recall that this is an arithmetic series. So answer is $$(109-1)/6+1=19$$
* how many two digit numbers are there?
    * two digit numbers starts with 10 and ends 99. So in total $99-10+1=90$.
* There is always a $+1$ term in many of those counting problems.

### Counting outcomes
* How many possible outcomes when you flip 
    * one coin? $2$
    * the probability of getting the head is $1/2$.
    * two coins? $2*2=4$
    * the probability of getting two heads is $1/4$.
    * $n$ coins? $2^n$
* How many possible out comes when you roll 
    * one dice? $6$
    * $n$ dice? $6^n$
    * the probability of getting $6$ is $1/6$.
* You have $3$ choices of starters, $5$ choices of entries, $3$ choices of dessert. How many combinations?
    * $3*5*3=45$

### Shaking hands and gift swap
* A family of $5$ would like to send christmas gifts to everyone else. How many gifts they need to buy?
    * $5*4=20$.
    * A family of $n$ would need $n*(n-1)$.
* A group of $5$ would like to shake hands with each other. How many handshakes in total?
    * $5*4/2=10$.
    * A family of $n$ would need $n*(n-1)/2$.
    * a second way: $4+3+2+1=10$
    * a third way: counting lines

* A group of $5$ would like to pick $2$ to form a Lego robot team. How many?
    * same as handshake problem.
    * how about a team of $3$? how many?

* Pokemom deul?
    * Choose $3$ out of $5$ pokemoms for a fight with fight order $1,2,3$.
    * $5*4*3=60$

### Venn Diagram
* In a class of $50$, there are $25$ students who has a cat, $20$ who has a dog and $10$ who does not own a pet at all. How many studnets who own both a cat and a dog?
    * $50-10=25+20-x$
    * $x=5$

* In a class of $50$, there are $25$ students who has a cat, $20$ who has a dog and $5$ who owns a dog and a cat. How many studnets who does not have neither a cat nor a dog?
    * total number of student who owns a dog or a cat $20+25-5=40$.
    * So $10$. 

* In a class, $20$ own a cat, $25$ own a dog, $15$ own a fish, $7$ own both a cat and a dog, $8$ own both a dog and a fish, $5$ owns both a cat and a fish, $3$ owns all three. Everyone owns at least a dog, cat or fish. How many students in total?
    * own a cat and a dog only: $7-3=4$
    * own a cat and a fish only: $5-3=2$
    * own a fish and a dog only: $8-3=5$
    * own a cat only: $20-4-2-3=11$
    * own a dog only: $25-4-5-3=13$
    * own a fish only: $15-2-5-3=5$
    * total number $=11+13+5+4+2+5+3=43$
    * total number alternative formula $=20+25+15-7-8-5+3=43$
    * why? in terms of Venn diagram and overcounting.

* How many numbers less than $101$ is divisible by $2$, $3$ and $5$?
    * $50$ divisible by $2$, $33$ divisible by $3$, $20$ divisible by $5$
    * $16$ divisible by $6=2*3$, $10$ divisible by $10=2*5$, $6$ divisible by $15$
    * $3$ divisible by $30$
    * total $=50+33+20-16-10-6+3=84$


### Case works
* $4*4$ grid points contains how many squares as its vertices?
* AMC8 coat hanging problem

