## Lecture 8: Form a queue or form a team
There are two basic counting problems that extends the gift swap and handshake problem in general. Given a room of $n$ students, last time, we visited two types of problems

* swap gifts with each other. How many gifts in total? Answer: $n(n-1)$
* the number of handshakes: $\frac{n(n-1)}{2}=1+2+...+n-1$

Here you can also draw a graph with (without) direction to solve the problem. Now let us push the situation in general.  
### Form a queue 
**Question 1**: Given a room of $n$ students, form a queue of $k$ students. 

For simplicity, let us label all students by $1,2,...,n$. A queue of $k$ students means an order tuple $$(a_1,...,a_k)$$

For a group of $3$ students, we have

* all $1$-queues correspond to $(1),(2),(3)$
* all $2$-queues corresponds to $(12), (13),(21),(23),(31),(32)$. These are also gift swap pairs for $3$ students.
* all $3$-queues corresponds to all permutations $(123),(132),(213),(231),(312),(321)$.

The general formula is 
$$P(n,k)=n(n-1)...(n-k+1)=\frac{n!}{(n-k)!},$$
here we use factorial notation $m!=1\cdot2\cdots m$. The idea to prove this formula is very easy. We first pull one student as the first place of the queue so we have $n$ choices. When place next student into the queue, we have $n-1$ choices. So go on and on, until we places $k$-th student in the queue. 

In particular, forming $n$-queue for $n$ students will get $P(n,n)=n!$. $n$-queue has another name, called *permutations* of $n$ students. Check yourself for $n=3$ and $n=4$. One comment here is that $n!$ is a huge number even for $10!$.  

A list of properties of $P(n,k)$:
* $k\le n$;
* $P(n,1)=n$;
* $P(n,2)=n(n-1)$;
* $P(n,n)=n!$;
* $P(n,k)\le P(n,k+1)$

**Example**
* Take the word "WORD", if we pull $k$ letters and form a new word, how many different outcomes? Answer: $P(4,k)$. In particular, all permuation outcomes are $4!=24$.
* Take the word "ALGEBRA". How many permutations we get?
    * there are seven letters but two As.
    * let us pretend seven letters are different so we would get $7!=7*6*120=5040$.
    * notice the symmetry, picking the first A at first place and the second A at the sixth place is the same as picking the first A at the sixth place and picking the  second A at the first place. 
    * so we have $5040/2=2520$.
* All permutations of "ALGEBRA" with AA together. 
    * you can consider "AA" as a single letter. So the answer is $6!=720$.
* All permutations of "WORD" with "O" adjacent to "R".
    * consider "OR" in one letter so we get $3!=6$.
    * "OR" can be "RO" too. So total $12$.

### Form a team
**Question 2**: Given a room of $n$ students, form a team of $k$ students.

For a group of $3$ students, we have

* all $1$-teams correspond to $(1),(2),(3)$
* all $2$-teams corresponds to $(12)=(21), (13)=(31),(23)=(32)$. These are also handshake pairs.
* all $3$-team corresponds to one team $(123)=(132)=(213)=(231)=(312)=(321)$.

The general formula is 
$$\binom{n}{k}=\frac{P(n,k)}{k!}=\frac{n(n-1)...(n-k+1)}{k!}$$
The reason is that we can numerate all $k$-queues and then divided by the all $k$-permutations. 

**Examples**:
* $n=2$
    * $\binom{2}{1}=2$, $\binom{2}{2}=1$
* $n=4$
    * $\binom{4}{1}=4$, $\binom{4}{2}=6$,$\binom{4}{3}=4$, $\binom{4}{4}=1$
* $\binom{n}{1}=n$, $\binom{n}{n-1}=n$, $\binom{n}{n}=1$
    * picking $1$-teams is the same as picking $n-1$-teams
* $\binom{n}{k}=\binom{n}{n-k}$
    * check this is true using the formula as well
    * we define $\binom{n}{0}=\binom{n}{n}=1$
* Pascal's triangle by putting the binomial coefficient nicely
> ```
>           1
>         1   1
>       1   2   1
>     1   3   3   1
>   1   4   6   4   1
> 1   5  10   10   5   1
> ```

**Flipping a coin**:
* flipping $n$ times we get $2^n$ total outcomes
* flipping $n$ times with $k$ heads? Answer: $\binom{n}{k}$
    * if you do not believe, write it down.
    * flipping $3$ coins with one head: HTT, THT, TTH
    * idea: picking $k$ slots for heads (team)
* total outcomes are the same as the outcomes with $k$ heads for $k=0,1,...,n$. So we have
$$2^n=\binom{n}{0}+\binom{n}{1}+...+\binom{n}{n-1}+\binom{n}{n}$$

**Paths on a grid**: Moving only upperward or rightward, how many different paths?
|   |   |   |   |
|---|---|---|---|
|   |   |   |   |
|   |   |   |   |

Answer: $\binom{7}{3}$

**Retangles on grid**: $\binom{4}{2}*\binom{5}{2}=60$